---
layout: post
title: Computing History Records and Preservation 
---

Its the new year and christmas is over. Quite often, people go back to visit
their parents and family at Christmas and this year was no exception. This
prompted a bit of a trip down memory lane and on this trip, I discovered
something amusing; an old VHS Tape of "The Net" - A BBC2 Program from the
nineties.

<iframe width="460" height="360" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/slkDBB6RSYQ?rel=0&amp;start=818" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Watching all the episodes I realised that many of the issues in computing we
are still facing. One of these things is the recording of our digital heritage.
I've become more aware of the goings on inside museums, thanks to the
girlfriend mostly, but also in my own work. 20 years ago or more, I was writing
code and now I can't find it. I know there is a CD somewhere but will it still
work?

![Deluxe Paint](http://farm9.staticflickr.com/8212/8322543187_41fab267f3.jpg)

Before Mr Hockney's iPad paintings were cool, both my mother and sister were
working with digital mediums to create art. My mother is a professional
painter and even as early as GEM and the IBM 8088, she was creating rather
stunning works. Fortunately, my father, in his wisdom, preserved the floppy
disks and we now have access to a few of these images. Probably we don't have
them all.

The common misconception is we are all great at saving stuff. Surely, with all
the disks, floppies, SSDs, etc, we never lose a single thing. Wrong. We create
so much stuff we are losing even more. For example, no-one knows what the first
tweet was. There is no record of this. What about the first SMS message (I
believe we do have this actually, we probably got lucky).

The funny thing is, people were talkig about simulation and storage of data at
least 20 years ago now. What have we done since? Honestly, I don't know. Its
hard enough with personal data, let alone data that is relevent to an entire
people.

But lets assume, for a minute, that we have all the data and simulations and
machines. How do we display these things in a museum? Katie and I recently
visited the [Computng History Museum](http://www.computerhistory.org/) in Palo
Alto, California. As layout's go, it was rather good. They had exhibits like
the original Utah Teapot!

![Utah Teapot](http://farm9.staticflickr.com/8207/8260074539_80dff7c180.jpg)

The problem at this museum, and in general, is the focus on objects and
hardware. The section on computer graphics was poor in my estimation. Sure, its
my specialism and that makes me more prone to criticism but even so, they did a
bad job of charting progress in graphics. But software isn't an object; you
cant put it in a glass case for all to see. So what do you do?

The Victoria and Albert Musuem (V&A) had an interesting take in their last
exhibition, [The Best of British
Design](http://www.vam.ac.uk/content/exhibitions/exhibition-british-design/). One section was given over completely
to computer games (and rightly so! The UK was heavily involved in the early
scene). Their presentation, I thought, was particularly good. A company called
[Soda](http://www.soda.co.uk/work/vanda-british-design) developed the screens
and display for Lemmings. It was quite innovative and presented the design of
the characters very well.

Some might say that preserving code and data is something that museums haven't
warmed to yet. There is a resistance to putting collections online (which is
also irrational). When I used to teach at Central St Martins, I used
[archive.org](http://archive.org/) and the internet way-back machine to show
students the design for the original Google. It always gets a good laugh.

So basically, this is a problem and it will be interesting to see where it goes
from there. 

